
Dear Dr. Fortino,

We have now completed the review of your submission "The effect of climate
change on sediment organic matter processing in lakes: The role of changing
transparency." Our decision is to RESUBMIT FOR REVIEW.

Comments on the paper, based on the editorial and peer review process, can
be found at the end of this email. Please, consider the thorough and helpful
comments of the reviewers.

Please follow the relevant instructions below, referring also to ‘Author
Guidance - Part (2) Submission’ at:
https://www.fba.org.uk/journals/index.php/IW/about/submissions#authorGuidelines

Please revise and upload your manuscript within 45 days. Your revised
manuscript should be uploaded to your current submission by logging in as
above and following the instructions in 'Author Guidelines - Part (2)
Submission'.  The modified manuscript should NOT be uploaded as a new
submission.

If you have any questions, please contact me.

Vera Istvanovics
Phone +36 14631894
Fax +36 14631879
istvera@goliat.eik.bme.hu




COMMENTS FROM THE EDITORIAL AND PEER REVIEW PROCESS:

Resubmit for Review.
------------------------------------------------------
Reviewer C:
. The paper is well written with a precise abstract and a nice
introduction. I only miss a description of sediment/bottom characteristics -
erosion, transport and accumulation bottoms have quite a different content
of organic matter and are distributed with depth

2. The methods include a lake survey, sediment incubations and a case study
- good. My concern here is the same - there is no care taken about different
sediment properties in the case study nor in the Sediment oxygen demand
(SOD) experiments.

3. The results are presented in a proper and concise way but I still miss
differences in sediment properties above and below the thermocline. There is
no information about content of organic matter, loss on ignition, water
content etc from the sediments used in the experiments.

4. Discussion suffers from the same lack of information and care about
sediment characteristics

------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------
Reviewer D:
General
This is a quite well-written paper with appropriate field methods, that
describes three essentially separate pieces of work. I do, however, have
issues with the focus of the paper.  The title and the abstract suggest that
the main focus is the effect of climate change on sediment oxygen demand
(SOD): this is a minor part of the actual experimental work carried out, and
I would contend is as aspect of the paper that is weak, and is based on too
many unsubstantiated assumptions (see below).

The three sections of the paper include 1. measurement of a set of
parameters including Kd, cDOM, DOC and Chl a on one occasion during each of
three field seasons; 2. sediment core incubations to assess the role of
temperature and oxygen availability on sediment organic matter
mineralization (cores from three lakes); and 3. a single lake case study of
the effect of changes in Kd, lake temperature profiles and bathymetry.  The
results for the first of these studies are as would be expected: a strong
relationship between both CDOM and DOC, and Kd, and between CDOM and DOC.
The authors also report a significant relationship between Kd and
thermocline depth.  They go on to discuss the reported relationships between
Kd and thermocline depth, pointing out that similar relationships have been
reported from other studies.  For the sediment incubation experiment, they
report that SOD for their three lakes was positively related to temperature
and was also related to sediment source. This is the first published data
set on SOD from this region and therefore has merit in its own right.
Interestingly they report a lower temperature sensitivity than other
studies. They attribute this to selection for sediment microbial communities
that perform more efficiently at lower temperatures and support this with
literature.  However, I also note that the oxygen status of the water was
not manipulated or controlled in any way, as is usual when assessing of the
effect of anoxic conditions on mineralization.

The authors then carry out a ‘case study’ for one lake to evaluate how
changes in Kd might affect sediment organic matter mineralization under one
temperature and Kd scenario.  These future projections are based on a large
number of assumptions and on sparse data which I find are not all supported:

1.      They state that thermocline depth in GTH 91 was predicted from the
relationship between thermocline depth, Kd, surface area, and Julian day
established in the surveys.  In the first section (Lake surveys) the authors
note that Kd was significantly related to lake surface area and Julian day.
Is there not an issue with collinearly if both Kd, surface area and Julian
day are then used as independent variables in a regression? Indeed, there is
no mention here that any of the assumptions of linear regression were
assessed.
2.      In addition, surely there are only two actual dates available (n = 2 for
Julian day): 7th August and 12 July? The author’s state that Julian day
was significant in the model – do they have enough data to support this
statement? If this is not the case the authors need to clarify.
3.      Thermocline depth is then used to assign lake area to either above or
below the thermocline.  The authors say that this relationship is
’accurate’ but give no measure of fit, but also note that the
relationship was ‘skewed’ by 12.4%.  However, I do note that regressions
of the predicted and actual thermocline depths against Julian day do explain
92% of the variation.
4.      They based future temperature and Kd effects on relationships based on
data from their one sediment core incubation experiment. They note the
effect of patch–scale variation in environmental conditions on SOD based
on their incubation results, yet use these results to then calculate SOD
rates for the whole lake sediment area both now and in the future.
5.      They ‘model’ SOD rates below the thermocline (i.e. under anoxic
conditions) based on the relationship between SOD and DO levels in the water
column during their incubations, although there was no attempt to control
oxygen availability during those incubations. They then go on to use these
data to calculate below thermocline SOD rates for the whole lake!
6.      Their future projections for climate change impacts are based on one Kd
value (which in turn was based on one study from literature) and one
possible future temperature increase based on one other study.  I suggest
they at least base these temperature estimates on climate change projections
for the region?  Or used a range of temperatures to capture the uncertainly
that is widely acknowledged for future climate projections?

The authors proceed to make very definitive statements based on their
estimates of SOD such as ‘the net effect of warming and a decrease in lake
transparency is a reduction in the mineralization of sediment organic matter
in the lake and a greater burial efficiency of sediment organic matter.’
I do not think that this statement is supported by the analyses presented.
While there is merit in the overall point that the manuscript seeks to make
on the possible direction of change in SOD, it needs major revision to the
case study element before it is published. I would also suggest that the
title be changed.

Specific points:
•       Methods, and figure and table legends need to clearly note the number
of samples (n = ? for example for Figure 6).  The number of cores from each
lake incubated at each temperature is not mentioned – this is essential
information, since the future estimates are based on the variability of this
unknown number of cores. Similarly, they state that ‘Temperature,
irradiance and dissolved oxygen in lake GTH 91 were measured ‘as described
above’ so was this on one date/sampling occasion in each year as part of
the annual surveys? This is not clear.
•       They note that DOC concentrations have been increasing in several
regions, and are projected to increase further.  They then select a median
value for DOC concentrations based on a study of small Boreal Shield lakes
for their future scenario, and, using the relationship between DOC
concentration and Kd identified in the 2008 survey, predict the effect of an
increase in Kd on SOD. This justification belongs in methods, not in the
disucssion.
•       Similarly the future temperature increase of 3oC should be described
and justified in the methods NOT in the discussion.
•       Correlation coefficients or coefficients of determination not given for
data displayed in Figure 3?
•       Would spatial autocorrelation be an issue in the statistical analysis
here? This is not mentioned but should be addressed.
•       There is an issue with mixture of tenses in places: sometimes past
tense is used to describe results, and then in the following sentence,
present tense is used.

-------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------
Editor:
I share the opinion of Reviewer D that the weakest part of this work is the
prediction of sediment oxygen demand (SOD) under changed climate. My main
concern is that variability in Kd either could (in 2008) or could not be (in
2007) attributed to DOC during the lake surveys. The reasons of this
difference have not been clarified. ("Assuming that light attenuation is
primarily the result of cDOM, these results suggest that there was a
decoupling of the bulk DOC concentration from the chromophoric (i.e., light
attenuating) component of the DOC in 2007 but not 2008."). At the same time
the work calls the attention to a potential impact of climate change that
has been neglected by others. In the present structure, the MS aims at
verifying the starting hypothesis on the impact of climate change. I would
suggest to start with hypothesizing a transparency vs. SOD relationship and
propose in the Discussion that this relationship might strongly modify the
impact of climate change.
________________________________________________________________________
Inland Waters
https://www.fba.org.uk/journals/index.php/IW

The Ferry Landing, Far Sawrey, Ambleside, Cumbria, LA22 0LP, United Kingdom
Tel. +44 (0)1539 442468   Fax. +44 (0)1539 446914   Email. info@fba.org.uk
Website. www.fba.org.uk   Director: Dr Michael Dobson
Registered Charity No. 214440   Company Limited by Guarantee No. 263162, England  UKPRN No. 10018314, VAT No. GB 153895238

